---
layout: post
title: "Restorative Justice in Northeast Syria"
author: "heval ashtabula"
categories: justice
tags: [rojava,restorative justice,jiniology,dual power,complementarity]
image: restorative-justice-northeast-syria/jinwar.png
---

## Introduction

---

I want to start this off with a thought experiment. Imagine that, for one
reason or another, state authorities retreated from your area. For all intents
and purposes the government was just *gone* one day. How would you organize
your community?

Keep that in the back of your mind as we go.

At time of writing, the way of life most of us have practiced our entire lives
seems to be slowly falling the fuck apart. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to
rage and is about to see yet another wave. This is despite three separate
readily available vaccines and the incredibly mild inconvenience of wearing a
mask in public indoor spaces — but profound distrust in our national media
environment has all but shattered any shared conception of truth we might once
have operated from. Seizing on this (and arguably causing it) a long simmering
proto-fascist movement is right on the verge of boiling over. Lest we stop to
breathe for even a second, it turns out the looming threat of climate change is
already much further along than most of us hoped. And amidst all that, a
sizable chunk of us — those fortunate enough to survive (so far) the invisible
spectre of coronavirus — are also facing serious challenges to our material
condition, from poverty or houselessness to ailing health and collective
trauma. There is next to no social safety net and no hint that help will come
from elsewhere to save us from ourselves. Collapse — real collapse — has never
felt so tangible, or so imminent.

But it's not all bad news. In the last year and a half we have also seen the
largest popular uprising to agitate for social justice in U.S. history,
certainly within our lifetimes. Real progress has been made building networks
of solidarity on levels local, nationwide, and international. Despite the
valiant efforts of culture warlords, grifters, and law enforcement agencies,
working and lower middle class Americans now oppose the structural violence of
systemic racism at a scale not seen since the 1960s. More Americans than ever
have started looking critically at our nation's history of colonialism and
begun imagining paths toward justice. Worldwide, since 2018 a second wave of
popular progressive protest movements have kicked off from Hong Kong to
Catalonia, following the spate of Arab Spring and Occupy protests of the early
2010s and the racial and environmental justice movements across North America
in places like Ferguson, Baltimore, Sherman Park, Unist'ot'en, and Standing
Rock.

Revolution is in the air, and it could not be needed more urgently.

This article is part of a campaign for prison abolition being organized across
the U.S. As we apply ourselves to the unenviable task of imagining better
worlds, it behooves us to put serious thought into designing restorative and
transformative justice systems. These would be based not around a desire to
seek retribution on the guilty but to restore communities and transform systems
of oppression. A significant quandary is that of how we get to such a system
from the one we have now.

The broad question I want to consider here is the same one I started with. How
would you organize your community after the government pulled away? It's a big
ask, but this scenario grows more important to consider with every broken
annual heat or wildfire record. It does not have any one answer and we should
be instantly suspicious of the charlatan who claims to have one. We can only
approach this question together, imperfectly, with major trial and error. But
it helps enormously that we are far from the first to think of it.

We have a lot to learn from two Indigenous-led coalitions who have already
built quasi-stateless societies elsewhere in the world. Millions of people live
out their lives under autonomous administrations in the state of Chiapas,
Mexico, and the region of northeast Syria known to the Kurds as Rojava. Both
societies have fascinating justice systems with significant overlap in the way
they are structured. This is not quite on purpose, but it is also not at all a
coincidence. Later in this series we'll also look at the role education and
social ethics play in cultivating restorative justice, and lay out a case for
why, when we try to build a new world in the crumbling shell of the old,
Indigenous traditions around justice should be our collective guidestar.

### Disclaimer

Before we go on I want to be very clear about who I am — and who I'm not. I am
*not* an expert, let alone a thought leader. I'm here because I have useful
skills in research and education, but a lot of the things I'm about to describe
are entirely outside my lived experience. While I am not straightforwardly male
(or straight) I was born into a body with white skin and a penis. What's more,
a Ph.D. in astrophysics has trained me to deliver words to an audience with far
more confidence and authority than I've ever actually earned.

Because of these limitations, I've sought help from people who actually have
experienced the restorative justice systems we're about to discuss. We'll hear
more from them later in this series; right now I want you to grok that these
folx are here to share advice in their own words. We are, of course, fortunate
to have their time and attention. But I would also invite you to the idea
that — for reasons we will get into later — we cannot merely listen as a
passive academic exercise. Their willingness to talk is extremely practical,
and extremely symbiotic. What they give to us in knowledge and experience is
undoubtedly a gift, but it is also a seed. What we can give to them in return
is to sow that seed — as praxis, right here in our own community.

## Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria [AANES]

---

<figure>
  <img
    src="https://manyworldspod.github.io/assets/img/restorative-justice-northeast-syria/kurdistan.jpg"
    alt="geographic spread of modern Kurdistan"
    title="geographic spread of modern Kurdistan">
  <figcaption>
    Geographic spread of modern Kurdistan across the states of Iraq, Iran,
    Turkey, and Syria (source:
    <a href="https://thekurdishproject.org">The Kurdish Project</a>
    )
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Understanding the cultural revolution in Rojava requires historical context. A
fully honest discussion would probably start with European imperialism, World
War I, and the Sykes-Picot Agreement, but we don't have time for all that
today. The short version is that in 1916 some French and British assholes
secretly drew lines on a map and partitioned the former Ottoman Empire into a
mishmash of states with hard borders, casually disregarding centuries of
cultural variation across the entire subcontinent. (Incidentally, American
audiences unfamiliar with this history should keep Sykes-Picot in mind whenever
they wonder why the SWANA region is so geopolitically unstable.)

One people particularly affected by this history are the Kurds, whose
traditions, languages, and religions all stretch back thousands of years. The
area historically occupied by Kurds, a mountainous region in western Asia known
broadly as Kurdistan, was broken up between the states of Iraq, Iran, Turkey,
and Syria. I highlight the importance of states and borders to this story
because, like the Indigenous nations of North America, these constructs are
completely at odds with the way Kurds have lived on this land for literal
millenia. Some of the oldest surviving religions in the world are Kurdish. But
the modern Kurdish diaspora is balkanized. Kurdish nationalists in Iran
advocate for a state of their own; other Kurdish groups in Iraq and Syria have
formed separate, de facto autonomous governments. And while the last century
has seen the Kurds on both the giving and receiving end of incredible violence,
the overall tally is wildly asymmetric. Violence and genocide against Kurds is
the norm just as it is with many peoples native to Anatolia.

Rojava's autonomy was realized in the early years of the Syrian Civil War,
between 2011 and 2014. In the span of a few short years, a Kurdish militia
known as the People's Protection Units (YPG) successfully fended off the Syrian
army. They secured cities throughout the north including Qamişlo, Kobanî,
Amûdê, and Efrîn. As fighting intensified towards Aleppo to the west, the Assad
regime pulled out across the northeast, effectively ceding partial control to
the YPG with relatively little conflict and few casualties. In the areas they
captured, the YPG helped set up local municipal councils to manage
self-governance and day-to-day affairs. Bit by bit these direct popular
assemblies formed a functioning grassroots democracy, and in mid 2014 the first
formal Constitution of Rojava had been approved, establishing the Autonomous
Administration of North and East Syria (AANES).

<figure>
  <img
    src="https://manyworldspod.github.io/assets/img/restorative-justice-northeast-syria/rojava.png"
    alt="geographic layout of Rojava"
    title="geographic layout of Rojava">
  <figcaption>
    Geographic layout of Rojava circa 2019 (source:
    <a href="https://defendrojava.org">Emergency Committee for Rojava</a>
    )
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Since that time, the YPG have forged a coalition with other autonomous militia
groups under the umbrella of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). These include
the Women's Protection Units (YPJ), an all-women regiment who are the
international face of a radical and fundamental cultural shift in this part of
Syria. The system of self-government practiced here is called *democratic
confederalism*. It is founded not only on principles you might expect such as
autonomy and self-determination, but also on egalitarianism, gender equity, and
ecological balance. It holds that every form of oppression is based on that of
women by men, and that women's liberation is therefore necessary for everyone's
well-being. Leadership structures across Rojava, including all local councils,
education boards, and self-defence forces, mandate no less than 44%
representation from women at all times. The new field of jiniology (from the
Kurmanji word *jin* meaning "woman") provides women-only spaces to reinterpret
all of history, philosophy, politics, art, and science from the perspective of
women. And local councils establish cooperative communities to which women can
escape from abusive or violent situations and find economic empowerment.

Liberation of women is utterly fundamental to the revolution in Rojava. This is
especially evident in the administration's public education system, which
broadly emphasizes students' autonomy in shaping their curriculum. Like
geographical borders, rigid intellectual borders between subjects like science,
philosophy, and history are seen as artificial. Classrooms here are a lot more
fluid with topics flowing openly into one another, leaving students with a much
more dynamic understanding of the world around them. The goal of an education
in Rojava is not to train a person how to work, but to enrich themselves and
their community.

Rojava's justice system is equally fascinating. From a
[writeup](https://www.justsecurity.org/66725/northeastern-syria-complex-criminal-law-in-a-complicated-battlespace/)
in *Just Security*:

*When stability in Syria first dissolved in 2012, the inhabitants of
northeastern Syria attempted a level of democratic self-governance without the
acquiescence of the Syrian government. The Autonomous Administration of North
and East Syria (NES), or Rojava as it is known in Syria, has been the de facto
government in that region since 2012. Rojava has a constitution and a
[legal](https://www.ft.com/content/50102294-77fd-11e5-a95a-27d368e1ddf7) system
that notably features a ban on the
[death](http://www.biehlonbookchin.com/justice-system-in-rojava/) penalty,
female judges, a ban on extradition to death penalty countries like Iraq, and
creative [restorative](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2019/08/14/captured-isis-fighters-get-short-sentences-art-therapy-syria/?arc404=true)
justice. The courts have already tried thousands of Syrian ISIS suspects.*

Now, Rojava does have prisons and it does have a functional analog to cops. But
both these institutions serve a radically different purpose than their U.S.
counterparts. Like most things in Rojava, the Internal Security Forces (Asayîş)
are decentralized and autonomous. Asayîş officers who respond in a particular
community tend to be members of that community. They also do not have a
monopoly on legitimate use of violence; alternatives exist as municipal
Civilian Defense Forces and regional Self-Defense Forces. All of these groups
answer to the municipal councils which are ultimately composed of community
members. From a detailed analysis on the (now archived) website
[Peace in Kurdistan](https://web.archive.org/web/20161117064550/https://peaceinkurdistancampaign.com/2014/12/22/a-revolution-in-daily-life/):

*The point of the revolution, many people told us, is not to replace one
government with another, it is to end the rule of the state. The question, the
co-president of the Kurdish National Congress put it, is "how to rule not with
power but against power". State power is being dispersed in a number of ways.
The education of people as Asayish is taking place on a large scale, with the
aspiration that everyone will receive it. It is part of an attempt to diffuse
the means of coercion to everybody. People's self-defense, we were told, is
"so important that it can't be delegated". Through education (not only in the
use of weapons but also in mediation, ethics, the history of Kurdistan,
imperialism, the psychological war waged by popular culture and the importance
of education and self-critique), the fighter in charge of one training centre
told us, the aim is to finally abolish Asayish all together.*

Security forces in Rojava also actively engage with jiniology. The Asayîş have
not only adopted the standard male-female co-president structure, but also
formed a separate branch to deal specifically with gender-based violence. The
Asayîşa Jin are entirely made up of women who deal with women's general safety,
family disputes against women, and women's protection during public
celebrations and protests. Interviews with Western journalists will often
involve a mediator from this branch whose role is to act as a security blanket,
encouraging women to share traumatic experiences while reminding the
journalists that consent can be revoked at any time.

<figure>
  <img
    src="https://manyworldspod.github.io/assets/img/restorative-justice-northeast-syria/grandma.png"
    alt="Neighborhood elder on armed patrol"
    title="Neighborhood elder on armed patrol">
  <figcaption>A neighborhood elder on armed patrol</figcaption>
</figure>

At the neighborhood level, unarmed local grandmothers are often first
responders to community problems. Their role is to facilitate peace after major
disruptions, especially acts of emotional or physical violence. They don't
consider a case to be solved until a public truce is agreed to by all parties
involved. Reaching a truce can take months and is cause for celebration in a
kind of neighborhood feast. This helps ensure public accountability: if any
party violates the truce, the entire neighborhood will know.

And this brings us to the wider criminal justice system in Rojava. The
democratic confederalist approach to justice provides Peace and Consensus
Committees at the neighborhood, municipal, and regional levels. These
committees attempt to resolve both criminal and social justice issues by
treating them like community problems. The goal of the justice system is not to
punish offenders, but to sustain peace through consensus and reconciliation.
Rather than inflict harsh punishment, a mediated dialogue takes place in which
the accused must come to understand any injustice or damage they've caused. Per
a descriptive analysis in
[Capitalism Nature Socialism](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10455752.2020.1751222):

*In some cases, compensation is paid to the affected party, and in other cases
religion plays an important role in seeking forgiveness. If consensus is not
reached on the communal level, the matter is taken to the Peace and Consensus
Committee on the neighborhood level. The structure and proceedings of the
committee are essentially the same as on the communal level and settling the
case through consensus is once again the primary objective. The Peace and
Consensus Committees are not authorized to imprison people.*

Human rights violations, murder cases, and any others that can't be resolved by
the Peace and Consensus Committees get escalated up to courts. Judges presiding
over people's courts at the city and regional level can be nominated either by
a special justice commission (a product of municipal or regional assemblies) or
by any person who lives in that area. There are also four appellate judges at
the regional level and a final court for each canton (which is roughly
analogous to a U.S. state). Responding to criticisms that this structure is too
similar to Western hierarchical courts, the administration organized regional
Justice Platforms as an alternative to the people's courts:

*The Justice Platforms can be described as larger Peace and Consensus
Committees, consisting of up to 300 people from related communes and civil
society organizations. These people meet, discuss the case and try to reach
reconciliation through consensus. If it is not possible to reach consensus,
they vote. Thus, it is clear that consensus is key on all levels, and that the
primary goal is to settle the case through reconciliation, due to the fact that
it is understood to ensure social peace.*

It probably won't shock you to hear that jiniology thrives in the justice
system as well. Municipal women's assemblies provide housing and education to
women in their area in the form of book clubs and house calls to keep them
engaged. The Asayîşa Jin work with these women's assemblies to do safety
checkups, and directly interfere in cases of patriarchal violence, child
marriage, and polygamy. Separate Peace and Consensus Committees staffed
entirely by women maintain safe spaces for survivors and assist with the
mediation and reconciliation process.

Two kinds of prisons exist in Rojava: one for regular citizens, and one for
captured ISIS fighters. Both are run by the self-administration with strict
rules against private ownership, and considered an absolute last resort when
the accused has to be separated from their community for safety reasons. There
are also limits on how long a person can be incarcerated, and preparations made
to reintegrate them. According to one interviewee, roughly 80% of incarcerated
people in the municipal prisons are there because of domestic violence. On the
other hand, ISIS prisons are a huge social problem in Rojava because they break
down into two broad categories. Many inmates only joined ISIS in the first
place because of impossible decisions made under nightmarish circumstances.
Their crimes, while extreme, were also coerced — their options were to fight or
die horribly. Others were the more ideological core, the "true believers" who
often came to Syria from abroad. This distinction matters because the former
category is potentially open to reconciliation and eventual reintegration into
society. The latter would ideally be repatriated to their home countries, but
the AANES is not recognized internationally, so extradition is frequently
impossible.

In any case, available research suggests Rojava's restorative justice approach
has drastically reduced the prison population:

*In the city of Serê Kaniyê the number of prisoners has dropped from 200 during
the Assad regime time to 20 as of early 2016. Overall, there is a high rate of
case resolution at the level of the Peace and Consensus Committees, which
indicates wide acceptance of the new justice system by the local population.
Crime rates have dropped, especially with regard to theft, and as for crimes
related to patriarchal violence, the number of honor killings have declined
noticeably in NES. According to the women's organizations in NES, their work
has resulted in abusive men leaving their wives. In Hilelî, Qamişlo, any man
who beats his wife is socially ostracized and domestic violence seems to have
vanished. In 2017 there were approximately 200 divorces, mostly due to cases of
polygamy and child marriage.*

<figure>
  <img
    src="https://manyworldspod.github.io/assets/img/restorative-justice-northeast-syria/sehid.png"
    alt="Celebration for a şehîd"
    title="Celebration for a şehîd">
  <figcaption>
    Public celebration of şehîd Hevrîn Xelef, a civil engineer who led the
    formative efforts to improve civil society in Rojava. She also managed one
    of the economic councils and became co-chair of the energy authority in
    2016.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

In late 2020, partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic and partly due to an
unsustainable influx in ISIS prisoners, the administration announced general
amnesty for Syrian nationals. Per
[Rojava Information Center](https://twitter.com/rojavaic/status/1314879827892146177):

*Those guilty of infractions and misdemeanors; the sick; and over-75s will be
freed. Those guilty of serious felonies will see sentences halved, with life
sentences reduced to 20 years. Convicts fleeing justice have 60 days to hand
themselves in to benefit from the amnesty. Those not to be released include
those guilty of: espionage and treason; honor killings; drug trafficking;
commanders in terror organizations such as ISIS; and terrorists guilty of
violent crimes. Low-ranking members will be released if they can provide a
guarantor. Officials say the move is intended to promote a new approach to
justice, revitalize community relations, and relieve pressure in prisons
dealing with the strain of 10,000+ ISIS members.*

The Rojavan system, democratic confederalism, is not perfect and by its very
nature is always in flux. In contrast to its revolutionary ideals, the
administration's realities are morally complicated by its own self-defense
against Turkish incursion, Assad forces, and ISIS. But it's worth noting that
this system, which millions of people live under to this day, can trace its
intellectual provenance to American ecological and anarchist philosophy.
Democratic confederalism is based in part on an idea first proposed as a way to
reorganize American society around durable communities that can weather climate
change. If a pluralistic society can flourish amid the unimaginable brutality
of the Syrian Civil War, what might we be capable of right here at home?

## Analysis: paths to restorative justice

---

### Complementarity

So what can we take away from all this?

Earlier in this article I suggested that we cannot be idle receivers of
information. If you take nothing else from this entire debrief, please, let it
be this. A mutual exchange of ideas is not just a goal for today; it is not
mere bloviating, and it goes well beyond soulless woke liberal politics. It is,
in fact, a sturdy foundation for the only thing that can truly un-fuck our
national (and international) situation.

For perhaps the majority of people listening, the COVID-19 pandemic is the
first time in living memory you got the idea that our entire society might be
built on sand. The engines of neoliberal capitalism were completely unprepared
to respond to a disaster of this magnitude. In the months since, we've been
watching infrastructure slowly crumble in a way
[not all that different](https://www.galvnews.com/news/free/article_2d9d26ea-a11d-5447-995c-3c7524f9f762.html)
from the collapse of the former Soviet Union. I personally have several friends
who, already bouncing between unstable service industry jobs, completely lost
the income they need to survive and faced eviction or houselessness. I also
know rural small business operators to whom useless politicians passed the
buck, forcing them to make an impossible choice between staying open during a
global pandemic or cutting off their only way to break even and sustain their
families. I am certain many of you listening can relate to this. The point is
not to cast blame on this political party or that convenient scapegoat; it is
instead to take a sober look across our fair land and accept that ***help is
not coming***.

But neither does it have to. We're all we've got; we're also
[all we need](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OsoYeD6JGu0).

Another phenomenon that occurred in the wake of COVID-19 is the surge in
popularity of *mutual aid*. Right away I want to draw a bold line for folx new
to this concept. Mutual aid is very different from charity, where a relatively
small group of individuals give to another group in a time of need. As a
practice, there's nothing inherently wrong with charity — lots of people are
fed and sheltered by the generosity of others. Within the recipient's life
though, it tends to be a temporary fix. It is also easily co-opted by bad-faith
actors. When charity is executed on a global scale by a billionaire funded
nonprofit industrial complex, it propagates a specific ideology about who has
influence and who ought to. This can have a devastating impact on real human
lives. When vaccines emerged that could seemingly end the COVID-19 pandemic,
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation — a massively influential nonprofit —
[successfully lobbied](https://www.wired.com/story/opinion-the-world-loses-under-bill-gates-vaccine-colonialism/)
against open source distribution on the grounds that it would threaten
intellectual property rights.

In lieu of ideology, mutual aid is both built on and reinforced by a social
ethic of ***complementarity***. In biology this term is connected to symbiosis,
the phenomenon where several organisms mutually thrive within the same
ecosystem. Think of the way bees pollinate flowers and other flora, allowing
the bees to eat and the flowers to reproduce. Scaled up to something like an
apple tree, a much broader system of biological sustenance is achieved because
other organisms (like humans) eat the fruit of those trees.

This is not just an analogy. It is the way Indigenous peoples the world over
have been living for centuries, and in many of those circumstances, it is
intimately tied to their conceptions of justice. We'll revisit this later in
more detail but I will note Indigenous peoples are far and away Earth's best
human land stewards,
[overseeing](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/can-indigenous-land-stewardship-protect-biodiversity-)
some 80% of land-based biodiversity worldwide. When you see yourself as
symbiotic with the life all around you, your idea of justice will naturally
adapt to that worldview.

What does this look like in practice? In northeast Syria there is a concept
rooted in Kurdish tradition called *hevaltî*. The word roughly translates as
"friendship," but it means something
[altogether more profound](https://roarmag.org/essays/eyewitnesses-to-the-rojava-revolution-hevalti-and-dignity/)
than the generic Western understanding of that term. Northeast Syria is not just home to Kurds; it is
a multi-ethnic society of up to 4.6 million people in which very different
cultures must coexist. The
[AANES social contract](https://internationalistcommune.com/social-contract/)
acknowledges this in its opening lines:

*We, the people of the Democratic Autonomous Regions of Afrin, Jazira and
Kobani, a confederation of Kurds, Arabs, Syriacs, Arameans, Turkmen, Armenians
and Chechens, freely and solemnly declare and establish this Charter.*

Speaking to the need for complementarity, the charter continues:

*In pursuit of freedom, justice, dignity and democracy and led by principles of
equality and environmental sustainability, the Charter proclaims a new social
contract, based upon mutual and peaceful coexistence and understanding between
all strands of society. It protects fundamental human rights and liberties and
reaffirms the peoples' right to self-determination.*

The culture of *hevaltî* means that among the citizens of this region there is
a mutual understanding that "my community consists of my friends." Not as some
vague abstract platitude, but as a very real social category. There are things
you do for your friends that you just wouldn't do for someone you don't feel
connected to or consider your societal equal. This very simple reframing lies
at the heart of the revolutions in both Chiapas and Rojava.

It is not at all a coincidence that the Zapatistas practice a remarkably
similar community ethic, which they call *Zapatismo*. To me it underscores
something so intuitive and *spiritual* that it's almost too important to carry
just one name. In the
[words](https://www.schoolsforchiapas.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Zapatismo-Today-and-Tomorrow-Understanding-the-Rebellion.pdf)
of Subcomandante Marcos, the Zapatistas' spokesperson:

*Zapatismo is not an ideology, it is not a bought and paid for doctrine. It is
[...] an intuition. Something so open and flexible that it really occurs in all
places. Zapatismo poses the question: "What is it that has excluded me?" "What
is it that has isolated me?" In each place the response is different. Zapatismo
simply states the question and stipulates that the response is plural, that the
response is inclusive.*

Think back again to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. One of the very first
things many of us naturally did was figure out who on our block was elderly or
immunocompromised. We organized very simple distribution networks to make sure
these people had access to basic necessities without putting themselves at risk
of exposure to the virus. At the time, I lived in rural Pennsylvania across the
street from a lifelong gardener well into her 80s. When I did supply drops of
cat litter, dry goods, and toiletries, she gave me fresh peppers, cucumbers,
and tomatoes out of her garden. As time went on the less vulnerable neighbors
on my block would take turns arranging supply drops and that garden became a
kind of free farmer's market.

The culture of complementarity practiced in places like Rojava and Chiapas is
extensive. It includes community members who generally suffer invisibly here in
the U.S.: the houseless and convicted so-called criminals. I invite you to the
idea that on the road to realizing restorative justice in Milwaukee, our first
stop could be a simple — yet radical — shift in our collective thinking. We can
start viewing these forgotten neighbors not as annoyances or less-fortunates to
exploit for clout or virtue signaling, but as our friends.

What would you do for your friend if they were in a bind? My guess is that,
whatever your answer, your first instinct is probably much closer to solidarity
than to charity.

### Dual Power

Mutual aid is essential, but it alone is not enough to sustain us. It is
absolutely true that, in the face of disaster, small networks of people and
even whole communities can and do rise up to meet each others' needs. It is
also true that when this happens, state actors tend to react like the hammer of
God come to fuck up their Christmas.

There is a vast body of sociological research to support this. One seminal work
is *Elites and Panic: More to Fear than Fear Itself*, a 2008 analysis
documenting a phenomenon the authors dub *elite panic*. To quote the paper's
[introduction](https://www.jstor.org/stable/20430900):

*Sociological research on how people respond to disasters has been going on for
more than 50 years. From that research comes one of the most robust conclusions
in sociology: panic is rare. There is detailed research on supper club fires,
airplane crashes, epidemics, hurricanes and so on. Regardless of whether the
hazard is dramatic or mundane, whether there is a low or high body-count, or
whether the threat is acute or chronic, social scientists agree that "panic"
explains little that is important about how people, in collectives, respond to
disaster.*

Panic from below is extraordinarily rare. From the great San Francisco fire of
1906, to the behavior of Londoners during the blitz, to New Orleans in the wake
of Hurricane Katrina — when the chips are truly down, communities of people
tend to respond by organizing rudimentary distribution networks and other
mutual aid. Mass hysteria, B-movie style pandemonium in the streets, is all but
unheard of. What is extremely common is panic from above: elites and authority
figures, including elected politicians and business tycoons, reflexively
pulling the levers of state power to assert their dominance. This is hardly a
shock in the early half of 2022, after 24 months of a global pandemic has
stranded vast groups of people without any substantive safety net. Violent
police riots have routinely followed even the mildest forms of antiracist
dissent, while fascist street gangs openly invade liberal enclaves like Los
Angeles and Portland without any hint of law enforcement response. On a
completely unrelated note, a Business Insider article from October 2020 found
that American billionaires had grown their personal wealth by more than 637
billion dollars since January of the same year.

Politicians and the ultra-wealthy, nominally our society's decision makers who
have access to extraordinary resources and incomprehensibly vast oceans of
data, ultimately tend to prioritize threats to their power, influence, and
public reputation while everyone else worries about the survival of their
neighborhood. Their decisions are not the only, or even the most important,
ones that need to be made. The author Cory Doctorow, in analyzing Rebecca
Solnit's essential work
[*A Paradise Built in Hell*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/301070/a-paradise-built-in-hell-by-rebecca-solnit/),
summarizes the situation this way:

*Elites tend to believe in a venal, selfish, and essentially monstrous version
of human nature, which I sometimes think is their own human nature. I mean,
people don't become incredibly wealthy and powerful by being angelic,
necessarily. They believe that only their power keeps the rest of us in line
and that when it somehow shrinks away, our seething violence will rise to the
surface — that was very clear in Katrina. Timothy Garton Ash and Maureen Dowd
and all these other people immediately jumped on the bandwagon and started
writing commentaries based on the assumption that the rumors of mass violence
during Katrina were true. A lot of people have never understood that the rumors
were dispelled and that those things didn't actually happen; it's tragic.*

It's worth asking, loudly, why this happens. There are as many answers to this
question as there are politicians, and each of those answers is complex and
sociologically fascinating. For our purposes, what's important is that it
definitely is not the result of some vague grand conspiracy. Power is an
exceptionally potent drug even in mild doses and there has been no human being,
living or dead, immune to its effects. What we are dealing with is not some
loosely defined notion of evil, and none of this is meant as an excuse to make
value judgments against individual people. Elite panic and the drug of power
are both deeply rooted in the human psyche, much like a hedgerow. We will never
be rid of them, but we can do a better job of balancing them with other human
tendencies — like egalitarianism. I'm lingering on this point because the death
of nuance is a huge part of how we all got into our current mess. In a media
environment built so fundamentally and for so long on outrage, cynicism is an
especially easy trap. It can lead to dehumanization of the political "other,"
which desensitizes us to violence. It works to raise our national temperature
closer to a boiling point. It's also an essential ingredient in kicking off
modern civil conflicts.

I invite you to the idea that a much more fruitful alternative is to build
durable networks of solidarity, and it's here that I have to lay my cards on
the table. The lessons I'm curating from both Chiapas and Rojava are
overwhelmingly focused more on social ethics than on ideology, and that is very
much in the spirit of both revolutions. Because to be blunt, human beings will
never share a single ideology and it would be unspeakably, foolishly arrogant
to try to impose one. Ideological pissing contests are a path to cynicism which
is a precondition for violence. Notwithstanding the direct cost in human lives,
a modern style civil war in North America would utterly devastate the entire
planet. The U.S. is the source of much of the world's agriculture, controls an
awful lot of its wealth, and, not for nothing, is littered with just an
absolute shitload of nuclear weapons. The American military is also the world's
largest emitter of greenhouse gasses and would only fart out even more during a
civil conflict scenario. I believe I've made my point: long-term sustainability
is no less central to our goals here than restorative justice, especially if
part of what we're restoring is ecological balance.

In truth, every democratic system should implicitly expect and accept both
disagreement and a certain lack of closure, sometimes bitterly so. The modern
United States is home to no less diverse a society than Syrian Kurdistan,
regardless of the lens you view it through: ethnically, politically,
spiritually, sexually, and geographically, there are some 300 million ways and
counting to be an American. And make no mistake, democracy is exactly the goal
— neither a liberal nor representative one, nor a system of pointlessly
bureaucratic popularity contests, nor a spooky shadow government come to take
your guns and your freedom — but a ***direct democracy***, a society truly run
from below by its people. To quote the American philosopher
[Murray Bookchin](https://www.democracynature.org/vol1/bookchin_libertarian.htm),
in a piece that directly inspired democratic confederalism:

*It is an effort to work from latent or incipient democratic possibilities
toward a radically new configuration of society itself–a communitarian society
oriented toward meeting human needs, responding to ecological imperatives, and
developing a new ethics based on sharing and cooperation. That it involves a
consistently independent form of politics is a truism. More important, it
involves a redefinition of politics, a return to the word's original Greek
meaning as the management of the community or polis by means of direct
face-to-face assemblies of the people in the formulation of public policy and
based on an ethics of complementarity and solidarity.*

Building a direct democracy is the project of ***dual power***. In both
Chiapas and Rojava, direct assemblies are formed from below starting at the
household level. A network of individuals forms a household assembly, a network
of households forms a neighborhood assembly, a network of neighborhoods forms a
municipal assembly, and so on. Rather than elect representatives, folx
generally take turns acting as delegates to churn the engines of decision
making themselves. Day-to-day life is not centered around work, at least not in
the way you're probably thinking. The goal is not to service the whims of a
middle manager with less experience than you or to stuff the pockets of some
rich asshole you'll never meet who lives in a city you'll never visit. Your
access to housing and healthcare does not depend on capricious dipshits who
only bother to talk to you when they can exploit you. In these autonomous
administrations, day-to-day life is generally structured around the people in
your community: your neighbors, your family, the people you see when you're out
at the store or spending a day at the beach, the people who care for your kids
and remember the names of your pets.

It's not perfect because people aren't perfect. But right now, as you read
this, socially conservative Arab farmers in the Euphrates Region are peacefully
coexisting with city dwellers in places like Qamişlo. Councils of neighborhood
grandmas are brokering peace between survivors and perpetrators of violence.
Women across northeast Syria are reinterpreting whole fields of study to
liberate each other from their most ancient oppressor. Many are co-leaders in
the SDF, defending their neighbors against the cancerous ideas at the heart of
both ISIS and advancing Turkish fascists.

Dual power, an American version of Zapatismo, is the best chance we have of
realizing similar autonomy right here at home in raw human defiance of the
crises of our age. Its aim is to build up a new world within the crumbling
shell of the old. It presents a strategy in which mutual aid infrastructure for
a social revolution from below is laid peacefully and in cooperation between
rural and urban localities, between conservative and progressive attitudes. It
will naturally oppose the crumbling state because the crumbling state rightly
sees mutual aid as a serious threat to its influence, and its bottom line. But
opposing the state is not really the point of dual power. Self-determination
is.

So how do we do this? How can a project of mutual aid expand nationwide while
remaining fundamentally local, nimble, and decentralized? How can a dual power
approach solve more complex infrastructure problems, like food and medicine
distribution or public education? What sort of justice system are we going to
replace police and prisons with? Coupled with that, how will we administer
mental health assistance to those who need it, when they need it? How can we
accomplish all this and more without replicating, through sheer force of habit,
the exact problems we're trying to fix? Will there be violins? Who's going to
make the violins? There do exist multiple proposed solutions to all of these
problems, but at the end of the day, it's for all of us to come together to
decide.

That sums up our first goal and our first call to action: to build cultural
infrastructure for autonomous decision making, which gets us on the path to
physical infrastructure for material needs. The coming episodes will feature
interviews from people involved in these movements in an attempt to learn and
apply their methods. We will also hear from local organizers who are already
forging viable paths. It's starting small, but the problems we face are
manageable if we break them down into person-sized parts.

And I don't know about you. But after the last few weeks -- the last few
*years* -- of relentless bad news, I could sure as shit use a community.

## Endnotes

---

This article was written while being sustained first by land and freshwater
sources in occupied Menominee, Ho-Chunk, Potawatomi, and Ojibwe territory, and
later on Lenape and Erie land.

I mentioned earlier that lack of international recognition presents a major
problem repatriating ISIS combatants held in Rojava. It also presents problems
for COVID-19 vaccine distribution, water and food distribution, and defense
against Russia-backed Turkish incursion. There are things you can do to help
with this: contact your representatives and express support for recognizing the
AANES as an autonomous government. To learn more please see the
[Rojava Must Survive](https://www.defendrojava.org/rojava-must-survive)
campaign.
