---
layout: post
title: "Restorative Justice in Northeast Syria"
author: "heval ashtabula"
categories: justice
tags: [rojava,justice,jiniology,dual power,complementarity]
image: YPJ.png
---

## Introduction

I want to start this off with a thought experiment. Imagine that, for one
reason or another, state authorities retreated from your area. For all intents
and purposes the government was just gone one day. How would you organize your
community?

Keep that in the back of your mind as we go.

At time of writing, the way of life most of us have practiced our entire lives
seems to be slowly falling the fuck apart. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to
rage and is about to see yet another wave. This is despite three separate
readily available vaccines and the incredibly mild inconvenience of wearing a
mask in public indoor spaces — but profound distrust in our national media
environment has all but shattered any shared conception of truth we might once
have operated from. Seizing on this (and arguably causing it) a long simmering
proto-fascist movement is right on the verge of boiling over. Lest we stop to
breathe for even a second, it turns out the looming threat of climate change is
already much further along than most of us hoped. And amidst all that, a
sizable chunk of us — those fortunate enough to survive (so far) the invisible
spectre of coronavirus — are also facing serious challenges to our material
condition, from poverty or houselessness to ailing health and collective
trauma. There is next to no social safety net and no hint that help will come
from elsewhere to save us from ourselves. Collapse — real collapse — has never
felt so tangible, or so imminent.

But it’s not all bad news. In the last year and a half we have also seen the
largest popular uprising to agitate for social justice in U.S. history,
certainly within our lifetimes. Real progress has been made building networks
of solidarity on levels local, nationwide, and international. Despite the
valiant efforts of culture warlords, grifters, and law enforcement agencies,
working and middle class Americans now oppose the structural violence of
systemic racism at a scale not seen since the 1960s. More Americans than ever
have started looking critically at our nation’s legacy of colonialism and
imagining paths towards justice. Worldwide, since 2018 a second wave of
popular progressive protest movements have kicked off from Hong Kong to
Catalonia, following the spate of Arab Spring and Occupy protests of the early
2010s and the racial and environmental justice movements across North America
in places like Ferguson, Baltimore, Sherman Park, Unist’ot’en, and Standing
Rock.

Revolution is in the air, and it could not be needed more urgently.

This article is part of Shut 'Em Down 2021, a bottom-up campaign for prison
abolition being organized across the U.S. As we apply ourselves to the
unenviable task of imagining better worlds, it behooves us to put serious
thought into designing restorative and transformative justice systems. These
would be based not around a desire to seek retribution on the guilty but to
restore communities and transform systems of oppression. A significant
quandary is that of how we get to such a system from the one we have now.

The broad question I want to consider here is the same one I started with. How
would you organize your community after the government pulled away? It’s a big
ask, but this scenario grows more important to consider with every broken
annual heat or wildfire record. It does not have any one answer and we should
be instantly suspicious of the charlatan who claims to have one. We can only
approach this question together, imperfectly, with major trial and error. But
it helps enormously that we are far from the first to think of it.

We have a lot to learn from two Indigenous-led coalitions who have already
built quasi-stateless societies elsewhere in the world. Millions of people live
out their lives under autonomous administrations in the state of Chiapas,
Mexico, and the region of northeast Syria known to many as Rojava. Both
societies have fascinating justice systems with significant overlap in the way
they are structured. This is not quite on purpose, but it is also not a
coincidence. Later in this series we’ll also look at the role education and
social ethics play in cultivating restorative justice, and lay out a case for
why, while trying to build a new world in the shell of the old, Indigenous
ideas around justice should be our North Star.

### Disclaimer

Before we go on I want to be very clear about who I am — and who I'm not. I am
*not* an expert, let alone a thought leader. I’m here because I have useful
skills in research and education, but a lot of the things I’m about to describe
are entirely outside my lived experience. While I am not straightforwardly male
(or straight) I was born into a body with white skin and a penis. What’s more,
a Ph.D. in astrophysics has trained me to deliver words to an audience with far
more confidence and authority than I’ve ever earned.

Because of these limitations, I’ve sought help from people who actually have
experienced the restorative justice systems we’re about to discuss. We’ll hear
more from them later in this series; right now I want you to grok that these
folx are here to share advice in their own words. We are, of course, fortunate
to have their time and attention. But I would also invite you to the idea
that — for reasons we will get into later — we cannot merely listen as a
passive academic exercise. Their willingness to talk is extremely practical,
and extremely symbiotic. What they give to us in knowledge and experience is
undoubtedly a gift, but it is also a seed. What we can give to them in return
is to sow that seed — as praxis, right here in our own community.

## Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria [AANES]

Understanding the cultural revolution in Rojava requires historical context. A
fully honest discussion would probably start with European imperialism, World
War I, and the Sykes-Picot Agreement, but we don’t have time for all that
today. The short version is that in 1916 some French and British assholes
secretly drew lines on a map and partitioned the former Ottoman Empire into a
mishmash of states with hard borders, casually disregarding centuries of
cultural variation across the entire subcontinent. (Incidentally, American
audiences unfamiliar with this history should keep Sykes-Picot in mind whenever
they wonder why the Middle East is so unstable.)

One people particularly affected by this history are the Kurds, whose
traditions, languages, and religions all stretch back thousands of years. The
area historically occupied by Kurds, a mountainous region in western Asia known
broadly as Kurdistan, was broken up between the states of Iraq, Iran, Turkey,
and Syria. I highlight the importance of states and borders to this story
because, like the Indigenous nations of North America, these constructs are
completely at odds with the way Kurds have lived on this land for literal
millenia. Some of the oldest surviving religions in the world are Kurdish. But
the modern Kurdish diaspora is balkanized. Kurdish nationalists in Iran
advocate for a state of their own; other Kurdish groups in Iraq and Syria have
formed separate, de facto autonomous governments. And while the last century
has seen the Kurds on both the giving and receiving end of incredible violence,
the overall tally is wildly asymmetric. Violence and genocide against Kurds is
the norm just as it is with many peoples native to Anatolia.

Rojava’s autonomy was realized in the early years of the Syrian Civil War,
between 2011 and 2014. In the span of a few short years, a Kurdish militia
known as the People’s Protection Units (YPG) successfully fended off the Syrian
army. They secured cities throughout the north including Qamişlo, Kobanî,
Amûdê, and Efrîn. As fighting intensified towards Aleppo to the west, the Assad
regime pulled out across the northeast, effectively ceding partial control to
the YPG with relatively little conflict and few casualties. In the areas they
captured, the YPG helped set up local municipal councils to manage
self-governance and day-to-day affairs. Bit by bit these direct popular
assemblies formed a functioning grassroots democracy, and in mid 2014 the first
formal Constitution of Rojava had been approved, establishing the Autonomous
Administration of North and East Syria (AANES).

Since that time, the YPG have forged a coalition with other autonomous militia
groups under the umbrella of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). These include
the Women’s Protection Units (YPJ), an all-women regiment who are the
international face of a radical and fundamental cultural shift in this part of
Syria. The system of self-government practiced here is called *democratic
confederalism*. It is founded not only on principles you might expect such as
autonomy and self-determination, but also on egalitarianism, gender equity, and
ecological balance. It holds that every form of oppression is based on that of
women by men, and that women’s liberation is therefore necessary for everyone’s
well-being. Leadership structures across Rojava, including all local councils,
education boards, and self-defence forces, mandate no less than 44%
representation from women at all times. The new field of jiniology (from the
Kurmanji word *jin* meaning "woman") provides women-only spaces to reinterpret
all of history, philosophy, politics, art, and science from the perspective of
women. And local councils establish cooperative communities to which women can
escape from abusive or violent situations and find economic empowerment.

Liberation of women is utterly fundamental to the revolution in Rojava. This is
especially evident in the administration’s public education system, which
broadly emphasizes students’ autonomy in shaping their curriculum. Like
geographical borders, rigid intellectual borders between subjects like science,
philosophy, and history are seen as artificial. Classrooms here are a lot more
fluid with topics flowing openly into one another, leaving students with a much
more dynamic understanding of the world around them. The goal of an education
in Rojava is not to train a person how to work, but to enrich themselves and
their community.

Rojava’s justice system is equally fascinating. From a writeup in Just
Security:

*When stability in Syria first dissolved in 2012, the inhabitants of
northeastern Syria attempted a level of democratic self-governance without the
acquiescence of the Syrian government. The Autonomous Administration of North
and East Syria (NES), or Rojava as it is known in Syria, has been the de facto
government in that region since 2012. Rojava has a constitution and a legal
system that notably features a ban on the death penalty, female judges, a ban
on extradition to death penalty countries like Iraq, and creative restorative
justice.  The courts have already tried thousands of Syrian ISIS suspects.*

Now, Rojava does have prisons and it does have a functional analog to cops. But
both these institutions serve a radically different purpose than their U.S.
counterparts. Like most things in Rojava, the Internal Security Forces (Asayîş)
are decentralized and autonomous. Asayîş officers who respond in a particular
community tend to be members of that community. They also do not have a
monopoly on legitimate use of violence; alternatives exist as municipal
Civilian Defense Forces and regional Self-Defense Forces. All of these groups
answer to the municipal councils which are ultimately composed of community
members. From a detailed analysis on the website Peace in Kurdistan:

*The point of the revolution, many people told us, is not to replace one
government with another, it is to end the rule of the state. The question, the
co-president of the Kurdish National Congress put it, is “how to rule not with
power but against power”. State power is being dispersed in a number of ways.
The education of people as Asayish is taking place on a large scale, with the
aspiration that everyone will receive it. It is part of an attempt to diffuse
the means of coercion to everybody. People's self-defense, we were told, is
"so important that it can’t be delegated". Through education (not only in the
use of weapons but also in mediation, ethics, the history of Kurdistan,
imperialism, the psychological war waged by popular culture and the importance
of education and self-critique), the fighter in charge of one training centre
told us, the aim is to finally abolish Asayish all together.*

Security forces in Rojava also actively engage with jiniology. The Asayîş have
not only adopted the standard male-female co-president structure, but also
formed a separate branch to deal specifically with gender-based violence. The
Asayîşa Jin are entirely made up of women who deal with women’s general safety,
family disputes against women, and women’s protection during public
celebrations and protests. Interviews with Western journalists will often
involve a mediator from this branch whose role is to act as a security blanket,
encouraging women to share traumatic experiences while reminding the
journalists that consent can be revoked at any time.

At the neighborhood level, unarmed local grandmothers are often first
responders to community problems. Their role is to facilitate peace after major
disruptions, especially acts of emotional or physical violence. They don't
consider a case to be solved until a public truce is agreed to by all parties
involved. Reaching a truce can take months and is cause for celebration in a
kind of neighborhood feast. This helps ensure public accountability: if any
party violates the truce, the entire neighborhood will know.

And this brings us to the wider criminal justice system in Rojava. The
democratic confederalist approach to justice provides Peace and Consensus
Committees at the neighborhood, municipal, and regional levels. These
committees attempt to resolve both criminal and social justice issues by
treating them like community problems. The goal of the justice system is not to
punish offenders, but to sustain peace through consensus and reconciliation.
Rather than inflict harsh punishment, a mediated dialogue takes place in which
the accused must come to understand any injustice or damage they’ve caused. Per
a descriptive analysis in Capitalism Nature Socialism:

*In some cases, compensation is paid to the affected party, and in other cases
religion plays an important role in seeking forgiveness. If consensus is not
reached on the communal level, the matter is taken to the Peace and Consensus
Committee on the neighborhood level. The structure and proceedings of the
committee are essentially the same as on the communal level and settling the
case through consensus is once again the primary objective. The Peace and
Consensus Committees are not authorized to imprison people.*

Human rights violations, murder cases, and any others that can’t be resolved by
the Peace and Consensus Committees get escalated up to courts. Judges presiding
over people’s courts at the city and regional level can be nominated either by
a special justice commission (a product of municipal or regional assemblies) or
by any person who lives in that area. There are also four appellate judges at
the regional level and a final court for each canton (which is roughly
analogous to a U.S. state). Responding to criticisms that this structure is too
similar to Western hierarchical courts, the administration organized regional
Justice Platforms as an alternative to the people’s courts:

*The Justice Platforms can be described as larger Peace and Consensus
Committees, consisting of up to 300 people from related communes and civil
society organizations. These people meet, discuss the case and try to reach
reconciliation through consensus. If it is not possible to reach consensus,
they vote. Thus, it is clear that consensus is key on all levels, and that the
primary goal is to settle the case through reconciliation, due to the fact that
it is understood to ensure social peace.*

It probably won’t shock you to hear that jiniology thrives in the justice
system as well. Municipal women’s assemblies provide housing and education to
women in their area in the form of book clubs and house calls to keep them
engaged. The Asayîşa Jin work with these women’s assemblies to do safety
checkups, and directly interfere in cases of patriarchal violence, child
marriage, and polygamy. Separate Peace and Consensus Committees staffed
entirely by women maintain safe spaces for survivors and assist with the
mediation and reconciliation process.

Two kinds of prisons exist in Rojava: one for regular citizens, and one for
captured ISIS fighters. Both are run by the self-administration with strict
rules against private ownership, and considered an absolute last resort when
the accused has to be separated from their community for safety reasons. There
are also limits on how long a person can be incarcerated, and preparations made
to reintegrate them. According to one interviewee, roughly 80% of incarcerated
people in the municipal prisons are there because of domestic violence. On the
other hand, ISIS prisons are a huge social problem in Rojava because they break
down into two broad categories. Many inmates only joined ISIS in the first
place because of impossible decisions made under nightmarish circumstances.
Their crimes, while extreme, were also coerced — their options were to fight or
die horribly. Others were the more ideological core, the “true believers” who
often came to Syria from abroad. This distinction matters because the former
category is potentially open to reconciliation and eventual reintegration into
society. The latter would ideally be repatriated to their home countries, but
the AANES is not recognized internationally, so extradition is frequently
impossible.

In any case, available research suggests Rojava’s restorative justice approach
has drastically reduced the prison population:

*In the city of Serê Kaniyê the number of prisoners has dropped from 200 during
the Assad regime time to 20 as of early 2016. Overall, there is a high rate of
case resolution at the level of the Peace and Consensus Committees, which
indicates wide acceptance of the new justice system by the local population.
Crime rates have dropped, especially with regard to theft, and as for crimes
related to patriarchal violence, the number of honor killings have declined
noticeably in NES. According to the women’s organizations in NES, their work
has resulted in abusive men leaving their wives. In Hilelî, Qamişlo, any man
who beats his wife is socially ostracized and domestic violence seems to have
vanished. In 2017 there were approximately 200 divorces, mostly due to cases of
polygamy and child marriage.*

In late 2020, partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic and partly due to an
unsustainable influx in ISIS prisoners, the administration announced general
amnesty for Syrian nationals. Per Rojava Information Center:

*Those guilty of infractions and misdemeanors; the sick; and over-75s will be
freed. Those guilty of serious felonies will see sentences halved, with life
sentences reduced to 20 years. Convicts fleeing justice have 60 days to hand
themselves in to benefit from the amnesty. Those not to be released include
those guilty of: espionage and treason; honor killings; drug trafficking;
commanders in terror organizations such as ISIS; and terrorists guilty of
violent crimes. Low-ranking members will be released if they can provide a
guarantor. Officials say the move is intended to promote a new approach to
justice, revitalize community relations, and relieve pressure in prisons
dealing with the strain of 10,000+ ISIS members.*

The Rojavan system, democratic confederalism, is not perfect and by its very
nature is always in flux. In contrast to its revolutionary ideals, the
administration’s realities are morally complicated by its own self-defense
against Turkish incursion, Assad forces, and ISIS. But it’s worth noting that
this system, which millions of people live under to this day, can trace its
intellectual provenance to American ecological and anarchist philosophy.
Democratic confederalism is based in part on an idea first proposed as a way to
reorganize American society around durable communities that can weather climate
change. If a pluralistic society can flourish amid the unimaginable brutality
of the Syrian Civil War, what might we be capable of right here at home?

## Paths to restorative justice

### Complementarity
