---
layout: page
title: mission
permalink: /about
---

<div class="featured-image">
  <img src="https://manyworldspod.github.io/assets/img/snail.jpg" alt="a black snail shell with red-orange spiral" title="a black snail shell with red-orange spiral">
</div>

Where Many Worlds Fit is a podcast covering international movements for radical
autonomy. Many of these movements are indigenous-led but pluralistic and
emerged from the surprisingly natural union of long-held cultural tradition
with anarchist ideas, often amidst devastating civil wars or within the
territories of failed nation-states and defending themselves from fascists.
Right now and for the foreseeable future, we are specifically interested in the
Kurdish-led Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (AANES, also
known as Rojava) and the Maya-led autonomous region of southeast Mexico in the
state of Chiapas (the Zapatistas of the Lacondan Jungle).

To tell these stories, on this podcast we incorporate four broad approaches.

## styles

### gonzo journalism

A threat to freedom anywhere is a threat to freedom everywhere. Indigenous
struggles for autonomy and self-determination are happening right now in many
parts of the world, and they could really use our help. This podcast aims to
provide some of that help in the form of documentation, education, and
advocacy. It grows out of the idea that international solidarity is more
effective when it carries both context and intent.

### sociology

Many of the researchers in the West already documenting these movements do so
from within the academic field of sociology. This podcast (along with many of
the aforementioned researchers) is/are very explicit about problems with
professional academia. So in the spirit of being good accomplices, we aim to
democratize the sociological record for this subject. We especially want to
bring to the intellectual commons things that serve the public interest, topics
with strong relevance at home such as alternative justice systems and
jiniology.

### oral history

Doing this has many uses, and among the most important of them is to actively
counter state messaging and propaganda. The Turkish and Syrian states have long
denied the Kurdish right to exist; the Mexican state denies basic support to
Maya and other indigenous peoples across the country; the American and Canadian
states are infamous for genocide and slavery. “We” the constructed public are
denied all of this context as part of that violent cultural erasure. Oral
histories are not only compatible with many indigenous traditions – they are
also a tactic, a kind of Rosetta stone for the rest of us who would stand in
solidarity with our indigenous compas.

### solarpunk futures

If you want to sprout a better world, you need an active imagination. What will
land back look like in your neighborhood? How will our notions of justice be
realized while we’re also mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate
change? We occasionally combine speculative fiction with the very real history
of radical autonomous movements to help foresee how it will play out in our own
backyard, and how we get there...

## episode formats

Our podcast aims to be collaborative while mixing together a few different
episode formats. We will most likely release on a sporadic schedule,
oscillating between a couple times a week and a couple times a season.

### scripted articles

These are long-form essays and journalistic articles, offering information,
context, and analysis, generally read by the author(s) and 30-90 minutes in
length. Each episode’s text is published online.

### interviews

Original research is conducted in the form of interviews and released as
available. Current interview subjects include internationalist organizers,
sociologists, Kurdish journalists, and houseless organizers.

### short stories

Like the scripted articles, short stories are 30-90 minutes in length, read by
the author, and constitute speculative fiction with a solarpunk bent. These
stories are meant to help us imagine the world we want to create.

### field reporting

A rather ambitious goal is to travel to places like Chiapas and northeast Syria
to conduct field reporting. This is not currently feasible, but it is something
to work towards. In the near term, places closer to home like the Menominee
forest in north Wisconsin are more imminently doable on a shoestring budget.

## music

[Yaotl Mictlan](https://yaotlmictlan.bandcamp.com/) are an Aztec folk metal
group who support struggles from below and to the left. Their productions,
such as **Entre Lluvias Fuertes** ("**between heavy rains**") in episode 1, are
used here with permission.

## contact us
